so continuing my series of great debates
in physics that we're doing all month
here on my channel
this week we are covering the one that
inspired it all
the great debate it was a debate that
raged
for decades before seeing two
giants of astronomy curtis and shapley
going head-to-head with each other
in 1920 and it was a debate that
eventually
got humanity to re-evaluate its entire
position
in the universe it is the 100th
anniversary of that debate this year and
even
after all that time i still think it can
teach us
so much especially sort of about how
science is done you know on the
front lines if you will you know when
you have
all this evidence but it's in fragments
and pieces and you're not entirely sure
how it all
fits together you know how do you reason
your way
through all that until the bigger
picture becomes
clear and in this case the big picture
was
the biggest picture there is how big
is the universe now i think
since the dawn of time humanity has
probably been asking this question of
how big is the universe and what is our
place
in it but world views or i guess
universe views if you will have changed
significantly over the millennia right
so you've got
ptolemy saying that the earth is at the
center of the universe
way back sort of around 100 bc then
you've got sort of in the 1500s a big
shift when copernicus
actually says that the sun is at the
center of the solar system and
you know the earth and all the planets
orbit around
the sun it was a hugely controversial
idea at the time you know it saw galileo
galilei being put under house arrest
because of his support of copernicus's
theory as well but once there was this
sort of huge pile of evidence in favor
of
you know the sun being at the center of
the solar system from planets motions in
the sky etc
you know it was readily accepted and not
only was the sun
kept at the center of the solar system
for centuries to come but also the
center of the universe which
at the time was essentially all the
known stars in the sky
i.e the milky way now i've talked before
on the show
about how we know the shape of the milky
way how we know that it's a flat disc
and it has this spiral structure so go
check out that video
if you're interested because it does
have a few sort of extra details that do
tie in to this debate on how big
was the universe because it was emmanuel
kant in 1771
who was sort of pondering on the fact
that you do see stars in this narrow
strip across the sky that you know
supposed to like spill milk which is
where we get the name
milky way from and he suggested that
perhaps all of these stars
orbit in a flat plain like the planets
do
around the sun and so the milky way was
this system of stars
that was orbiting something in the
center which was assumed to be
the sun but can't took it one step
further
as well and he said that the things in
the sky that weren't stars the sort of
fuzzy
patches that we called nebula were
also these systems of rotating
stars which he dubbed island universes
khan was a philosopher right not a
physicist
so his ideas were based on conjecture
and not necessarily
observations and evidence like
physicists like deal with so his ideas
weren't really picked up on at the time
but by the turn of the 20th century
astronomers had collected a lot of that
evidence and so everyone
generally agreed upon the rough shape of
the milky way as like cancer sort of
this flat
disc with all the stars sort of orbiting
around the center
now it was thought still that the sun
was at the center of that
system and it was thanks to captain's
work at the beginning of the 20th
century
that we thought that the milky way was
around about 30
000 light years across because that was
the rough distance to sort of the most
distant star
that had been found you can see that in
arthur eddington's map that
he made in 1912 which shows sort of the
rough shape of the galaxy but as you can
see the sun
is very much still in the middle
what people were missing to make
accurate maps of the milky way and sort
of the positions of stars that they saw
in the sky
was the distances to those stars because
you could record
where a star was in the sky and you
could recall that there were more
you know sort of along the plain of the
milky way but you couldn't really know
how distant they were and therefore you
couldn't work out whether the sun was
truly
in the middle of the galaxy or not
thankfully the ability to measure
distances came
in 1912 with henrietta leave its work
who was working as a computer at harvard
college observatory so she had been
assigned some work cataloging variable
stars in the small
magellanic cloud which is a little dwarf
galaxy that we now know to orbit
the milky way but again back then it was
considered sort of one of the
sort of nebula as a cluster of stars in
the milky way itself
and she noticed that there was a
correlation between the period that the
variable star pulsed at
and the star's brightness now obviously
the brightness of an object that we
measure here on earth is dependent on
how
far away that object is from us you know
that from everyday life right the more
distance an object is
the fainter it appears and so leave it
was conscious that obviously the
brightness that she was recording might
have something to do with the distance
those stars were from us but
all of these stars were in the small
magellanic cloud and so if you make the
assumption that all those stars are at
roughly the same distance from us which
was a good assumption to make
astronomically speaking
order of magnitude they're pretty much
the same distance
then you can assume there is a physical
relationship
between the actual brightness of the
star
and the period that it pulses at so not
the brightness that we necessarily
measure but the actual brightness
of it to know the actual brightness
instead of the
what we call the apparent brightness
that we observe because of our distance
we are
from it you obviously need to know the
distance
but if you could find the distance to
one of these variable stars
then you could calibrate that
relationship so that you could convert
the period to the actual brightness
measure the apparent brightness of the
star and then get the distance
and that came a few years later in 1917
when the distance to a nearby variable
star
was measured using parallax this is when
you measure
how much stars shift against the fixed
background stars that are much further
away from us
as earth moves around its orbit and you
can use some clever trigonometry
to figure out how far away they
therefore are by how much of an
angle they shift by so those parallaxes
essentially
calibrated this relationship that levitt
had discovered that came to be known as
leave its law and it meant that it could
be used to find the distances to things
that you couldn't use parallax for
because they were so far away that they
didn't shift
against the background stars so this is
where harlow
shapley comes in in 1917 he used
levitt's law to measure
the distances to globular clusters in
the milky way
these are you know clusters of about 100
000 stars or so in these big blobs that
are really easy to spot in the sky
so because these globular clusters have
so many stars in them it's likely that
at least one of them is
going to be one of these variable stars
that henrietta levitt was studying
and so shapley used levitt's law to work
out the distances to the goblet clusters
in the milky way
and that meant he was able to make a
much more accurate map of the milky way
one in which he did not put the sun in
the center of he noticed that you saw
the most globular clusters in the
direction of sagittarius
on the sky and so he concluded that that
should be the center of the galaxy
that's where it was sort of
densest the same way that you know the
majority of material in the solar system
is found in the very center in the sun
and he also estimated that the milky way
was about a hundred thousand light years
wide
much larger than the 30 000 light years
that captain had estimated it was about
20 years
earlier so because the size of the milky
way that shaping measured was so
much bigger than what captain had come
up with you know decades
earlier based on you know what was the
distance to the furthest star known
in the milky way he essentially
concluded that the milky way must be
so large that it was essentially
the entire universe
in the very same year though in 1917
herbert curtis was also trying to
measure the distance to something
but in his case it wasn't globular
clusters it was the andromeda
nebula as it was then known because it
was thought to be one of these sort of
clouds of
gas and dust in our own milky way galaxy
that perhaps stars were forming from
and in andromeda he observed what he
described as four brief brightenings of
what appeared in telescopes to be a
point source of light
like a star now he said these brief
brightenings were all
nova so not supernova like what happens
when a star dies but actually a sort of
a brief brightening of a brand
new star now when curtis observed these
nova he said they were 10 times fainter
than
anything ever seen in the milky way
before
and assuming that they are similar to
nova that happens in the milky way could
you then work out a distance to
andromeda
and the distance he got was 500
000 light years way
way bigger than even shapley's estimate
for the you know diameter of the milky
way a hundred thousand light years which
he assumed was the entire universe
so curtis came back to kant's idea of
island
universes or the fact that andromeda was
a galaxy in its own right just like
the milky way what curtis then did was
said okay if andromeda is
a galaxy just like the milky way if i
have the distance to it and i know how
big it appears on the sky
then again for some clever trigonometry
i can work out how big
it actually is in real life and the
number he arrived at was at about
30 000 light years which if you remember
is how big captain had estimated the
size of the milky way
back at the turn of the 20th century and
so
curtis came up with this model that the
milky way wasn't the entire universe
that the sort of spiral-shaped nebula
that you see in the sky
are actually galaxies island universes
if you want to call them in their own
right
but those galaxies were about 30
000 light years across or so much
smaller
than shapley was arguing that the milky
way was
cursed's argument therefore was that
these spiral nebula were actually
galaxies in their own
right but they were much smaller than
shapley had estimated at about 30 000
light years across
or so and that the sun was actually
still in the center
of our own milky way galaxy like captain
had argued at the beginning of the 20th
century it was george elijah hale whose
father had left a
large endowment for a lecture series at
the national academy of sciences
who suggested that the two have a public
debate on the scale of the universe
so in april 1926 at the smithsonian
museum of national history in washington
dc
the two both presented lectures arguing
for
their specific model of the universe
shaply for
the milky way is everything the sun is
not in the middle and it's about a
hundred thousand light years across
and curtis with his the milky way is not
everything you have these other galaxies
in the universe and they're much smaller
than
shapley saying about 30 000 and the sun
is in the middle of ours
just to sort of paint the picture a bit
for you so curtis in 1920 was 48
he was president of the royal
astronomical society of the pacific
he was a very well established and
respected astronomer he was a bit of a
traditionalist much more sort of
conservative
in his views than shapley who was the
sort of young scrappy and hungry
astronomer trying to make an aim for
himself and bagging himself the top job
at harvard college observatory
shapley was supposedly a lot more
uncomfortable with public speaking than
curtis was
you know curtis had many many years as
sort of a school master teaching like
latin and greek in his early days and i
think
with sort of all those facts about them
i think you can really imagine you know
how they sort of would have been uh
personality-wise and how they would have
carried themselves
in a room now the thing is you can't
really say like who
won the debate on the day because it
wasn't like sort of all the audience
voted for which scientific hypothesis
all of science would now be supporting
after that fact because they didn't have
that much evidence for or against either
idea at the time as
curtis was sort of famously quoted of
saying in his actual
lecture on that day you know more data
was clearly
needed so there wasn't really a
scientific conclusion
but what we can do you know with
hindsight is look back
on both the arguments that both curtis
and shapley made
and see which ones sort of stood the
test
of time and the thing is they were both
kind of half right so in 1926 edwin
hubble managed to observe
some variable stars in the andromeda
nebula and other spiral nebula
as well and so using leave its law he
managed to get a distance
and found that they were all over a
million light years away from us
definitely in support of curtis's sort
of
island universe argument shapley
apparently dismissed this very quickly
as
junk science and so hubble actually sort
of wrote to him
personally outlining all the
observations he'd taken and all the
conclusions
he had come to and chapley just you know
couldn't ignore the evidence
after all that you know i think he's
quoted in saying that you know here is
the letter
that killed my universe throughout the
20th century though more accurate maps
were made of the milky way itself using
you know different wavelengths of light
like infrared that could see through
dust and
radio waves that could trace the
hydrogen gas in it and it became
very clear that the sun wasn't at the
center of the galaxy and instead the
center indeed
was in sagittarius like shapley had said
and then actually at the center was a
supermassive black
hole but we also found that the milky
way had spiral structure
just like andromeda and it indeed was
about a hundred thousand light years
across
just like shapley had measured back in
1920.
so curtis was definitely right about the
spiral nebula being galaxies in their
own right these island universe theory
and so it's often curtis who's sort of
given
credit for winning the debate after all
but it was shapley who was right about
the size and scale of the milky way
itself at about a hundred thousand light
years across so like i said
they kind of both got it half right
it kind of makes me wonder like what
scientific debates are raging today
where two sides have got it half
right you know maybe the crisis in
cosmology that we've talked about on
this channel
before perhaps perhaps the sort of
supernova camp and the cosmic
microwave background camp perhaps
they've got it half right and if we
could just
work out which half each campus got
right we'd be able to solve
this strange crisis in cosmology where
we don't really agree on what the age of
the universe is
if you don't know what i'm talking about
check out the video that i did with joe
scott recently on his channel
sort of breaking down this crisis in
cosmology as much as we could but anyway
for the great debate
i think with hindsight we can say that
shapley
almost single-handedly won some battles
by himself right with his work
on globular clusters and arguing that
the sun wasn't in the center
of the milky way and showing that it was
about a hundred thousand light years
across
but with an army of scientists behind
him and all the results from the 20th
century
i think we can say that overall curtis
won the war
thanks for sticking around until the end
i know you're waiting for the bloopers
but first
an ad break do you want to learn
something new or
something else new well the brilliant
website or app is the perfect place to
do just that
brilliant has over 60 interactive
courses in science maths and computer
science which teach you the fundamental
concepts with
interactive aspects code writing and
storytelling
now brilliant has a brand new course all
about knowledge and uncertainty which i
think is perfect
for this video because we talked about
how astronomers went about solving the
problem of how big the universe was you
know with limited evidence and
unlimited knowledge when their data was
so uncertain so
brilliance knowledge and uncertainty
course teaches you the maths for how to
deal with that uncertain information
essentially
putting a number on how much we don't
know
so if you want to learn something new
then head over to brilliant.org forward
slash dr becky that's d-r-b-e-c-k-y
and sign up for free and the first 200
people that go to that link will get 20
off an annual premium subscription as
well so if you like the sound of that
and you want to support this channel
then head over there and say a big thank
you from me
saw two giants of astronomy in 1920
going head to head
curtis who's hurt so in 1917 hollow
shapely came along
shapely
it's very shapely you know i'm just like
my country i'm young scrappy and hungry
and i'm not throwing away my science